In information theory, one of the defining properties of a noisy communication channel is its channel capacity, or the maximum rate at which information can be faithfully transmitted. Classically this is found via the mutual information of the channel, a measure of the information shared by source and receiver. The quantum analogue is the coherent information of the channel, which also takes into account entanglement effects.

The coherent information of a quantum channel has the peculiar property of "superadditivity." This is in stark contrast to classical communication, where mutual information is additive: if a source sends twice as much information though the channel, a receiver should be able to recover twice as much. Since the mutual information scales linearly with channel use, a single use of the channel defines its properties. However, for quantum channels, coherent information can scale nonlinearly. That is, the recoverable information from multiple channel uses can exceed - albeit only slightly - the amount we would expect in classical communication. This allows for better scaling of information transmission when only a finite number of channel uses is possible. In the extreme case, quantum channels can even exhibit "superactivation," whereby repeated channel use allows information to be recovered from otherwise unusable channels. 

Superadditivity of coherent information has been established theoretically in the case of the dephrasure channel, which combines erasure and dephasing. The dephrasure channel exhibits superadditivity for as few as two channel uses; this, combined with the channel's simple form, makes it a good candidate for experimental investigation. We are currently in the process of developing an optical system to simulate the [dephrasure](https://journals.aps.org/prl/abstract/10.1103/PhysRevLett.121.160501) channel and test its properties of superadditivity and superactivation.